Add document: Standardizing COMIT Expiry Times (#64)
comit-network/spikes: 0027-safely-recommend-actions.adoc

== Swap State Machine

A successful COMIT atomic swap (happy path) may be expressed as a series of state transitions:

        Created --> Alpha Funded --> Beta Funded --> Beta Redeemed --> Alpha Redeemed --> Done

Each transition is associated with a specific action named accordingly e.g., 'fund alpha' transitions from created to alpha funded.

For each state transition there is a time requirement, henceforth called the transition period. The total time requirement for a swap is the sum of the transition periods. A transition period is effected by the state we are transitioning from and the state we are transitioning to, each transition period therefore is calculated differently.

== Transition Period

There exist a number of factors, that when combined, represent the transition period.

.Considerations
* Time to Act (`TTA`)
* Time to Inclusion (`TTI`)
* Time to Final (`TTF`)
* HTLC Expiry time

=== Time to Act

For each actor there is a time frame within which they can be expected to act.

> Different users will have different response times e.g., a long running daemon is likely to respond to swap transitions more quickly than a user who is manually checking an application before doing each action. We define Time To Act (`TTA`) as the window of time within which the counterparty can expected to take the next action.

Reviewer: >We define Time To Act (TTA) as the window of time within which the counterparty can expected to take the next action.

How do you justify the TTA?

Author: I made an educated guess. I specifically am not investing time into picking perfect values for this project, rather the focus is on making sure every value that would be needed to configure this is present.

=== Time To Inclusion

For each blockchain there exists a time for a transaction to be included in a block.

> The likelihood of a transaction being included in a block is dependant on the transaction fee coupled with the current load on the blockchain network i.e., the number of current unconfirmed transactions. An increase in the transaction fee leads to an increase in the probability that the transaction will be included. Inclusion is not guaranteed, therefore the probability is defined to be the percentage chance of a transaction being included in a block within the next `N` blocks.

Reviewer: > The likelihood of a transaction being included in a block is dependant on the transaction fee coupled with the current load on the blockchain network i.e., the number of current unconfirmed transactions.

The likelihood of a transaction being included also depends on the probability of a block being found. On average there is a block every 10 minutes but there is no guarantee that there will be a block every 10 minutes.

Good read on this: https://www.reddit.com/r/btc/comments/6v5ee7/block_times_and_probabilities/

Author: Man, this link is awesome, I did not have even the slightest inclination of this. Thanks

> The likelihood of a transaction being included in a block is dependant on the transaction fee coupled with the current load on the blockchain network i.e., the number of current unconfirmed transactions. An increase in the transaction fee leads to an increase in the probability that the transaction will be included. Inclusion is not guaranteed, therefore the probability is defined to be the percentage chance of a transaction being included in a block within the next `N` blocks.

Reviewer: > Inclusion is not guaranteed, therefore the probability is defined to be the percentage chance of a transaction being included in a block within the next N blocks.

I don't see a percentage chance being used in your formula.

Author: It was intentionally left out :)

With a given fee and a given probability tolerance we define Time To Inclusion for a given blockchain as:

----

> TTI = N * <average block time>

Reviewer: We should mention that N depends on the amount, i.e. I would ask for at least 6 confirmations for $1mio transaction vs. 1 confirmation is fine for a $1000 transaction.

Author: I don't think N depends on a concrete amount. It depends on the perceived value of the amount. I may think that $1000 is a lot of money and needs 20 confirmations on Bitcoin but you may consider $1000 to be pocket change and be happy with 1 confirmation. For me this is implied in the configuration of number of required confirmations.

Is anyone even going to read this spike again after the implementation is done? I doubt it, since it does not live with the code (as I originally hoped) it is just an artefact of the dev process to me. I can definitely add a section on further configuration considerations that folks may wish to use.

Reviewer: > I don't think N depends on a concrete amount. It depends on the perceived value of the amount. I may think that $1000 is a lot of money and needs 20 confirmations on Bitcoin but you may consider $1000 to be pocket change and be happy with 1 confirmation. For me this is implied in the configuration of number of required confirmations.

The reason why the amounts matter is because _attacking_ a blockchain costs money. A 1h/6 blockchain reorg for Bitcoin currently costs ~$500k in hashing power which means if you have a $1mio tx it's worth to invest those $500k into a 51% attack and create a 6 block deep re-org to double spend your $1mio transaction. On Ethereum a 1h attack on the otherhand would only cost you about $300k. 
It's not worth to spend $500k on a reorg if you want to double spend a $1000 tx. 
This means, the finality for a transaction of a blockchain depends on the amount and the current hash rate cost. 

A nice table on cost: https://www.crypto51.app/
A recent example of a 51% attack: https://www.coindesk.com/ethereum-classic-suffers-second-51-attack-in-a-week

Author: Cool, I did not know about this. I don't really think that we need to consider transactions with value greater than $300k at the moment when we do not even have a mainnet solution. I would think that it should be noted somewhere in the docs though. Thanks for educating me. Would documentation of this consideration be enough for you?

----

> === Time To Final

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Time To Finality
```

Finality might be the term to use.

Author: I had that at first. One of my aims in this doc was to use the smallest word that fully described what I meant 'Time To Final' does this equally as well as 'Time To Finality' so I went with 'final'.

Reviewer: I proposed to use `Finality` because it has a special meaning in the blockchain space ([random source from google](https://academy.binance.com/glossary/finality)). Feel free to leave `Final` though.

Author: Oh cool, again good knowledge sharing thanks. I will use 'finality'.

For each blockchain there exists a time, after a transaction has been included in a block, that the transaction is considered to be final.

> Confirmations represent the number of blocks in the block chain that have been accepted by the network since the block that includes the transaction. The number of confirmations a transaction has determines the probability that a blockchain fork will invalidate the transaction. With a given blockchain we define Time To Final as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Confirmations represent the number of blocks in the blockchain that have been accepted by the network since the block that includes the transaction. The number of confirmations a transaction has determines the probability that a blockchain fork will invalidate the transaction. With a given blockchain we define Time To Final as:
```

Author: Fixed, thanks.

> Confirmations represent the number of blocks in the block chain that have been accepted by the network since the block that includes the transaction. The number of confirmations a transaction has determines the probability that a blockchain fork will invalidate the transaction. With a given blockchain we define Time To Final as:

Reviewer: > The number of confirmations a transaction has determines the probability that a blockchain fork will invalidate the transaction.

A fork does not invalidate a transaction. A fork might result in the fact that the transaction never happened.

Author: Terminology corrected, thanks.

----
TTF = <number of required confirmations> * <average block time>
----

=== HTLC Expiry Time

COMIT swaps are atomic due to the functionality provide by Hash Time Locked Contracts. Mapped to COMIT swap parlance, a user may not refund until after the expiry time has elapsed.

The atomic guarantees of the COMIT protocols rely on the beta expiry time being _before_ the alpha expiry time, these expiry times are absolute (as opposed to relative) i.e., seconds since epoch.

> In order for a swap to be guaranteed atomic the redeem transaction must be included in the blockchain _before_ the expiry time elapses. Therefore the redeem action is subject to some `TTI` calculated for the given blockchain. Repeating because this is important; the expiry time represents a hard limit, the redeem transaction must be included in a block before the expiry elapses for the swap to be atomic.

Reviewer 2: If you fancy, you could go more into detail here of why it is not atomic otherwise: The expiry time represents the earliest moment in time where the refund transaction is considered to be valid and can be broadcasted to the network. Henceforth, starting from this point it becomes a race of which transaction is included first. Given that the two transactions are mutually-exclusive, only one of them can make it.

Author: I added your words to the doc.

Therefore, there exists a time `T` after which attempting the redeem action is considered 'unsafe' i.e., the probability of the transaction being included in a block is less than some predefined tolerance:

----
T = <expiry time> - TTI
----

Please note, that the `TTI` need not be the same for the redeem transaction as for the fund transaction since different fees can be used for each transaction as required.

== Functionality

The system is expected to provide the following functionality:

.Requirements
1. Given two blockchains, create a pair of useful expiries.
2. Given a pair of expiries and their respective blockchains, determine if the expiries are useful.
3. Given the current swap state, determine what the user should do.

> A pair of expiries is 'useful' if, at this moment, both parties are able to execute all steps to complete the swap.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A pair of expiries is 'useful' if both parties are likely to execute all steps to complete the swap.
```

Author: Used as suggested.

2. A pair of expiries is useful if there is time to take each action required to complete the swap i.e., the expiry pair is useful if there is time to transition to the first action AND there is time for each subsequent action.

3. Semantically the next possible action is either the next happy path action or cancel. Cancel is either refund or abort.

.Semantic actions
* *next*: The next happy path action (deterministic from the state diagram).
* *refund*: Send a refund transaction to the blockchain (cancel after fund).
* *wait_for_refund*: Refund is not yet available but should be taken when available.
* *abort*: Take no further action (cancel before fund).

The recommended next action can be fully determined from the following algorithm:

----
1. IF refund is available RETURN refund
2. IF there is time to transition to next AND there is time for the subsequent action RETURN next
3. IF have funded RETURN wait_for_refund
4. RETURN abort

> ----

Reviewer: I find it hard to follow this algorithm. Especially the recursive part of step 2. Maybe a structured [pseudocode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudocode#Example) approach would more suitable?

Author: I used
```
IF refund is available (implies fund has occurred) AND expiry time has elapsed
        RETURN refund

IF there is time to transition from the current state to the next state AND there is time to complete the next action
        RETURN next

IF we have funded
        RETURN wait_for_refund

RETURN abort
```

Note that step 2 is recursive, the base case being the final stage of the annotated state diagram - done (see below).

=== Explanation

Various events must occur in order to transition from one state to the next. We can identify these events and annotate the state diagram accordingly. If we are able to calculate the time of each of these events we are able to fully determine the period of each transition.

We define the Time To Final to be a part of the transition to a state e.g., the alpha funded state is not reached until the alpha fund transaction has become final.

> There exists a transition diagram for each actor. Each actor progresses along their own state diagram but must be able to predict the state progression of the counterparty in order to determine whether progression is possible for the counterparty.

Reviewer 2: "Must predict" might be a bit too strong maybe? It has this co-notation of "we are fucked if that is not true" :grimacing: 

A way I like to think about it is that every actor (and hence every implementation of COMIT) needs to have a _model_ of what the counterparty is going to do. The model could be wrong and we should account for that.

This is effectively a way of ensuring that we build our stuff "trustless".

Author: Cool.

.Annotated state diagram for Alice:
----
(Create) TTA_A TTI_AF TTF_A (alpha funded) TTA_B TTI_BF TTF_B (beta funded) TTA_A TTI_BR TTC_B (beta redeemed) (done)

> ----

Reviewer: Sorry, I have no idea what that means :) If this is some kind of standard, can you link the source to the model please?

Author: I don't really know how to make this clearer. The acronyms represent functions that return a time value, these state diagrams include the time values required to transition from one state to the next. If there is some standard for writing this I'm happy to learn it.

.Annotated state diagram for Bob:
----
(Create) TTA_A TTI_AF TTF_A (alpha funded) TTA_B TTI_BF TTF_B (beta funded) TTA_A TTI_BR (beta redeemed) TTA_B TTI_AR TTC_A (alpha redeemed) (done)
----

For a swap to continue, at all times, each actor must be able to transition to 'done' before the expiry time governing their redeem action elapses.

.Key:
* (state): states are shown inside parenthesis
* `TTA_A`: `TTA` for Alice
* `TTA_B`: `TTA` for Bob
* `TTI_AF`: `TTI` for Alpha Fund transaction
* `TTI_BF`: `TTI` for Beta Fund transaction
* `TTI_AR`: `TTI` for Alpha Redeem transaction
* `TTI_BR`: `TTI` for Beta Redeem transaction
* `TTF_A`: `TTF` for Alpha ledger

> * `TTF_B`: `TTF` for Beta ledger

Reviewer 2: Are these going to show up as identifiers in the code? :grimacing:

I am a bit worried that we are gonna have a soup of abbreviated variables that are very easy to mix-up if one makes good use of auto-complete given that they all start with the same two letters.

A tip for implementing this: assuming they would all be `u64`, re-using them would "just work" because they are all `Copy`. If you want to avoid that and let the compiler help you to not make a mistake, you might want to make newtypes that are purposely _not_ `Copy` so you get a "move" error when you re-use one of them accidentally.

Author: > Are these going to show up as identifiers in the code?

These codes were just my way of showing the there is some amount of time required to transition that should be accounted for. _How_ they are calculated is only roughly outlined because, as you and @bonomat both point out I believe, calculating these things is heuristic at best.

.Note

> * `TTI_AR` is not actually essential for Bob, we assume Bob waits for Alice's redeem transaction to be included in a block, technically by monitoring unconfirmed transactions (e.g. watching the Bitcoin mempool) `TTI_AR` could be removed. This in no way effects the security of the protocol.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

> * `TTI_AR` is not actually essential for Bob, we assume Bob waits for Alice's redeem transaction to be included in a block, technically by monitoring unconfirmed transactions (e.g. watching the Bitcoin mempool) `TTI_AR` could be removed. This in no way effects the security of the protocol.

Reviewer: > * `TTI_AR` is not actually essential for Bob, we assume Bob waits for Alice's redeem transaction to be included in a block, technically by monitoring unconfirmed transactions (e.g. watching the Bitcoin mempool) `TTI_AR` could be removed. This in no way effects the security of the protocol.

Adding a note on why this is not essential could help the reader.

Author: I thought this was the note :)

== Calculating Events

=== Time to Act

Time To Act should allow for network congestion and expected response of the user.

* `TTA_B` is defined to be 15 minutes

> * `TTA_A` is defined to be 60 minutes

Reviewer 2: This is based on the idea that Bob = nectar and therefore automated right?

Maybe we can just generalize this and say, an automated party is expected to respond within 15 minutes and a human within 60.

Author: Nice idea, incorporated. Thanks.

=== Time To Include

(TODO: This section is incomplete)

This is a common task within the ecosystem of each blockchain, as such we will do as is typical for each. We dynamically determine the suggested fee after defining `P` and N.

.Values (Bitcoin/Ethereum)
* P: probability ???
* N: number of blocks ???

=== Time To Final

We consider a transaction final once `X` number of blocks have been accepted by the network since the transaction was included.

.We define `X` to be
* Bitcoin: 6

> * Ethereum: 12

Reviewer 2: This is not enough if it should be similar to Bitcoin :)

6 BTC blocks are effectively one hour, Ethereum mines 210 blocks in an hour :D

Author: Is there a reason it should it be similar to Bitcoin? I just did a web search on what number of confirmations folks in the Ethereum ecosystem use and came up with 12.
